---
layout: post
title:  "Louis's Rants"
date:   2025-07-03 00:00:00 -0500
categories: Story
tags: 
---
This article is reorganized from a wiki article of Illini Electric Motorsports
#
As a freshman, I was so eager to do everything I could to make the car better. I'd be looking for work constantly and feel guilty whenever I have free time and there's no FSAE work to do. Maybe it's IM team culture that got to me, but I simply decided that I was going to make FSAE my first priority in life and didn't feel like I can get burnt out from the work. While that hasn't changed much and I still very much enjoy the work that I do, I was thinking about something dangerous: quitting the team. I was shocked as soon as that thought got to me, and I decided otherwise after realizing that, for better or for worse, I'm made of nothing but what I do on this team and that the infinite void would be too big to fill with any other commitment (I mean what other RSO would want people to spend 40+ hours a week working on anything). So, this page is going to be my reflections on both me and the team. Although not intended for anyone to read since people who care about what I care about would have the same frustrations with the team and people who don't understand my frustrations aren't going to change, it might become useful one day (maybe if we don't do anything about what's happening, and the team meet its demise a few years later, someone might find it interesting to read).

## "Freshman Project"
I was fortunate enough to join this team with a fair bit of motorsports experience under my belt --I've driven and tuned my own race car for two years, so terms like understeer and caster is fairly familiar to me and I knew that ARB is the most important thing to tune car balance. It was pretty clear that I wanted to do vehicle dynamics the first day I joined the team, and I was asking Matt to explain every inch of the IM 2023 suspension design poster till late night. Being the energetic new joiner that I was, I immediately asked him if there is something that I could've done but was told that I had to wait until everyone gets on boarded to get assigned a project. "OK," I thought, "I'd get something cool to do when that happens."

A few weeks passed and I was at the suspension kick start meeting when I saw the "freshman project" page and saw zero vehicle dynamics related project on it other than maybe caster jacking study and compliance study. Of course, even those projects are a bit too simple to be taken seriously and Matt told me later in the conversations that they don't really even matter. A few months passed and I was still practically doing nothing after I finished my A-arm bracket CAD because I was waiting on suspension loads. Sure, I also took on the python lap sim lead by Sam and pretty much finished the GGV generation functions alone, but Matt was passionately against that project so that also ended up not being worked on. The design season soon became nothing but me 3D printing everything on the team and the occasional turning. To be really frank about it, it felt like shit. I still remember that one time I got yelled at for simply taking the wheel of the car or grinding down the welds on the A-arm. Seeing how people are dying from work that I could've helped out on but being unable to help out only because I was a new joiner really hurts.

Even after I've gotten that jacket that I've always wanted and at Michigan standing around the car, I can't help but realize that there is so little that I can do simply because nobody trusts me with anything still. People would ask me to check fasteners on the car only to redo what I did. Although I was technically "RE" for the monocoque brackets and A-arm manufacturing, no sense of ownership was felt, and I swore right there that I was going to lead my project differently next year. 

I chose to say "available project" instead of "freshman project" or "new member project" because I can't get over the implications of that phrase: this project is too marginal to be worth my time, yet I am going to assign it to new people because they are looking for work and this is work. My eyelid still twitches every time I hear that word because I know exactly what it felt like for me. When you give people a "freshman project" you are literally telling them that this work matters less than the rest of the car and it's not worth working on. I don't know what kind of intelligence you think the regular people have, but I can assure you that everyone that I've talked to hate it when they're given obviously useless work to do. Maybe we need to start thinking about why even after most people leave the team by manufacturing season, we're still short on competency, and maybe, just maybe, if we give people important enough work and agree on the first day that it is crucial for the success of the car and make them responsible for what they do, people would value their work more and deliver more.

Just because people want work, and you don't need help doesn't mean that you should create meaningless bullshit for new joiners to do. Capable people will be more willing to stay if they're more engaged and have more responsibilities. The concept of a "freshman project" is in the way of the success of this team. Every single time I stand in front of Murphy I think of the countless ways that car could've been so much better if all in my class did not waste their precious time designing mounts and jigs that could've been done by anyone with decent CAD knowledge in 10 minutes only to be scrapped because they just don't work. Hell, me this year is definitely no smarter than I was last year and if I am allowed to be in charge of the cooling system this year almost without any prior knowledge, how come I am any more capable of doing it this year than the last? I could've done what I did this year at the same speed and quality last year; all the I needed was permission to do so, permission that I didn't have. 

## What is a Project Lead?
If there is one thing I wish I'd known more at the beginning of the semester, it's the boundary of responsibilities of project leads. I operated under the assumption that I have full authority and responsibilities of my project and is expected to figure as many things out by myself as possible, only asking for help as a last resort. Logically, the idea is that I would report to my subsystem lead and then my subsystem lead would report to the captains, which obviously mean that they are not supposed to have direct influence over my project. But apparently some people on this team have different ideas about how to draw that line and that was made very clear when someone had a completely pointless argument with me about how the captain apparently can just force me make changes even if I have full chain of logic proving how a solution is better. I didn't say it there and then, but my thoughts were: "if this is how the team is run, I'd rather quit than spend 4 years not being respected as an engineer."

So, the big questions: what even is a project lead? It seems like each subsystem does it a little differently and one would certainly notice just how wide the gamut of competence level, but in general, it seems to simply mean whoever stays on the team that's not a new joiner. My question to that is "WHY?" Leading a project means so much more than just designing your component well (not to mention some people apparently fail to do even that) but also means taking full responsibility of the project. Seeing it from its beginning to the end, working pretty much independently: research by searching both on this Wiki and online, modeling and analysis, all the way to manufacturing. I fail to see why somebody can retain the title when all they've done is stay in their comfort zone and then stop working whenever they run into a problem instead of at least trying to even Google it.

People who are not up for it don't need a project to lead. While it is great that we're designing a new car each year, with the significant problem we're having in human resources, it's becoming more and more clear that it's just better to make less car. There is just not way that a frickin' box has the same administration level as the cooling system of the car. Take the brake as an example, it's being spread very thin into three projects: pedal, rotors, and hydraulics. We either wasted valuable time of three skilled members by making each of them PL and teach new people how to do everything they did or fall into what we have this year with the pedals where less than a week worth of work is being done on it. It makes it even sadder that these projects where the scopes are small enough to be completed by one person are the ones that get new members, new members whose time is better spent on important, but beginner friendly projects like pump selection or scrape map. The PL administrative level is such a convoluted pile of mess that I think should be restructured. In a alternative world where there is one brakes PL who understands enough about all parts of the brakes system to oversee three general members, the general members, perhaps new joiners, can have a more collaborative relationship with the PL and the project and take up less of the lead's bandwidth to keep track of people. Similar idea has been proposed for aerodynamics for its size, I don't see why not apply it to the rest of the team.

## Why are We Here?
I guess we are kind of a "new team" when IM joined with IFE to become IEM. While it's definitely better to have more people, the merger seems to be forcing two vastly different team cultures to work together. There is the "comp result above all" championship mindset from IM and the "get my project on the car" mindset from IFE. While one might say straight up that the first mindset is better than the second, I think there's merit in both and it's worth figuring out which mindset we're operating on after the merger. Looking back at the new joiner kickoff meeting slides, our team goal is apparently to "build an A+ team", and the most important bullet point seems to be to "create a productive team culture". But what does that even mean? How does one define productive? Is it to maximize overall work delivered? If so, how does that differ from simply winning? Reading about this confuses me more, is the team about being enjoyable or about winning?

I noticed that it varies subsystem to subsystem, and what I've felt on suspension my first year is that we're here to win. It was a group of 5.5 people that cared very much about the car and its results, Matt in particular. He cared so much that, when things didn't go according to plan during the summer, he decided to stay pretty much all summer to make the car happen. We didn't deserve that 3rd place autocross trophy, Matt did. 

This year, everything feels different. Even from the little bit of interaction that I have with suspension the overall goal seems to be only saving a few kgs. Despite the new aero package and the necessity that it brought to redesign the suspension; we made very little effort to even try to change the suspension geometry. Not to mention that we seem to have done A-arm analysis incorrectly and nobody has caught that at design reviews. It's absolutely frustrating seeing how the inserts are not done AND the RE for that is playing intermural football (soccer). 

So the question is why really are we here? If we wanted to build an "A+ team" that treats people well, we haven't dealt with people well enough, and I haven't talked to a singular person that doesn't hate this team; if our goal is to win, we clearly aren't doing that either. Figuring this out is very important, yet I don't think many people realize this. Sure, people would say that there is some sort of a balance but look what we've done in trying to make that balance: every single person hates this team and most of the core members that I know want to quit. 

These people wanting to quit means that we can't do this any longer. What even is the point of trying to treat people better if we're clearly doing a worse job than last year at retaining members? People are here instead of ASME or any other engineering RSO because we care more about winning than others, and if we get rid of that, I don't know what's left of this team. 

## Vibe Check?
It's really not a feeling unique to me that the computer room has become an inhabitable place for anyone looking for a productive environment. For how much people have told me that it's just a completely different space, I think it's worthwhile to "delve" into this nonsense that is happening here. Let's start with what I've noticed: there just aren't as much technical discussions happening in the room as much as last year. I've seen what's on the whiteboards of this room change no more than like 5 times, and I think I'm the single biggest contributor to most of those changes. I might just be tripping but seeing more than half a year-old content on that board is solid prove that there's not as much going on. 

I very much miss the late nights when the computer room is full of leads talking about team related stuff, no matter it is our car, something other teams do, or just random cool engineering stuff that people find interesting. That was back when I felt like I've finally found a place that I belong, a place where I can share all my autistic jokes about engineering that only this group would get. 

Well those days are long gone. People's faces no longer light up when cool things happen. Instead, we have a lead paying $5 for some person that I don't even know to dance for 3 minutes. The faces of me when I hear about how something works is now the face of people when they broke the silence of the room with some off-topic discussion. It seems that only the occasional discussions about favorite food, movies, or music are the only things that lightens up the mood of the room. 

It's not just the computer room as well, manufacturing sessions are supposed to be when people shared cool facts about the car or explained what they did in design, but it just looks like we're not doing any of that anymore. It really just seems like people forgot that it's the engineering that's cool about this car, not the physical object. 

The more I've talked to new joiners this season the more I realized how big a difference it makes to talk to them in an engaging way. As soon as I explain the whys and how's behind what they're making at a layup session, I can just see how knowledge of how the car is designed have the same effects on these people as all of the useless chitchats. 

PEOPLE THINK WHAT WE'RE DOING IS COOL, WE JUST GOTTA TELL THEM WHAT WE'RE DOING.

I couldn't be less angry about this team whenever we complain about the lack of talent yet chose not to use manufacturing sessions as an opportunity to explain the design or the process. We are simply choosing to fail if we don't make sure people understand every engineering decision that leads to the part being on the car.

## Vibe Check, Pt. 2
I think I'm getting really close to the bottom of this vibe shift of the ESPL but finding the answer to all of this is probably still far, far away. People not asking whys, not taking responsibility of their projects, not taking the initiative to simply figure something out, not thinking for themselves when told to do something... All these are somewhat attributed to people not having as much fun in doing what we do anymore. To be honest, it's nobody's fault that people are trying to have some fun in the computer room, but somehow, we've transitioned from having fun while working --whether it is laughing at some janky thing that we did or talking about cool progress on vehicle development-- to trying to have fun between dreading work sessions by talking about food or movies. I can't help but notice the conversations happening in our side of the computer room is starting to sound more and more like the other side of the computer room. We used to despise that part of the room not just because they occupied space that was once ours, but also whenever they would have random conversations about things while they work because that is solid proof that they're not actually into what they do. 

When people ask me what makes FSAE special from all the other RSOs, my answer used to be that we're a group of people not just passionate about achieving some cool results, but also really passionate about the process of engineering the cool results. I'm afraid I can't tell that to anyone with a straight face anymore.
